---
layout: post
title: America First, WHO Second
short: covid19trumpwho
categories: Politics
author: Bliss Perry
date-written: April 24th, 2020
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
no-blurb-image: noimage
excerpt: <p>The last week has been filled by accusations against the WHO by the US government, culminating in the withdrawal of $400M in funding. In this article, we explore the political motivations for the American disengagement with the WHO amidst a context of withdrawal from global institutions by the Trump administration.</p>
---

When President Donald Trump announced his move to withhold \$400M of future U.S. funding to the World Health Organization, he claimed that this decision was ostensibly motivated by a desire to protest its alleged role in [“severely mismanaging and covering up the coronavirus.”](https://twitter.com/WhiteHouse/status/1250194670031974400) Many words have been shed about WHO's initial handling of the COVID-19 crisis, and this article will not take a stance on such a debate. Rather, we will focus on what is implicit in this declaration - indignation at the WHO’s perceived "unfair" relationship with China, which, in the logic of the President, led to collusion between the two to downplay the initial outbreak of the disease. In this lens, the action can be seen as an attempt to use the US’s role as the largest source of WHO funding to galvanize support against China’s prominent role in the organization, ultimately weakening the latter’s influence therein and creating a "better deal" for America - in Mr. Trump's often-used language of describing American involvement in international institutions.

It seems, however, that any attempts at turning the WHO and China away from each other have failed - with the Chinese government announcing on Thursday that they would be providing an extra $30M in funding to the organization. The amount of money in this decision - $30M is a lot, but not nearly enough to offset a \$400M loss - is not as significant as its timing. Indeed, many commentators have identified this decision specifically as a response to the American announcement, with former Australian national security advisor John Lee stating that [“Beijing sees an opportunity … following the US decision to halt funding to WHO.”](https://www.businessinsider.com/china-who-multimillion-dollar-contribution-political-power-move-2020-4) In other words, if America is unwilling to play a leading role in supporting the WHO, we’re seeing that China is more than happy to step up in place.

<iframe title="Contributions to the WHO in USD, 2019 and 2020 (projected)" aria-label="Table" id="datawrapper-chart-XUsAH" src="//datawrapper.dwcdn.net/XUsAH/1/" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="width: 0; min-width: 100% !important; border: none;" height="228"></iframe><script type="text/javascript">!function(){"use strict";window.addEventListener("message",function(a){if(void 0!==a.data["datawrapper-height"])for(var e in a.data["datawrapper-height"]){var t=document.getElementById("datawrapper-chart-"+e)||document.querySelector("iframe[src*='"+e+"']");t&&(t.style.height=a.data["datawrapper-height"][e]+"px")}})}();
</script>

These charts show the impact of the decision. In short, the US decision to withdraw funding, and the Chinese increase in response, only grows the Chinese proportion of contributions at American expense. Whereas the US used to contribute over 10x as much as China, now it contributes only about 4-5x as much. In other words - the American decision to withdraw funding has directly led to increased Chinese proportion of funding, which can potentially be used as an avenue of the type of more assertive influence which the US wished to prevent.

<iframe title="Sources of Funding to the WHO, 2019 and 2020 (Projected)" aria-label="Interactive pie chart" id="datawrapper-chart-YGXWb" src="//datawrapper.dwcdn.net/YGXWb/1/" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="width: 0; min-width: 100% !important; border: none;" height="445"></iframe><script type="text/javascript">!function(){"use strict";window.addEventListener("message",function(a){if(void 0!==a.data["datawrapper-height"])for(var e in a.data["datawrapper-height"]){var t=document.getElementById("datawrapper-chart-"+e)||document.querySelector("iframe[src*='"+e+"']");t&&(t.style.height=a.data["datawrapper-height"][e]+"px")}})}();
</script>

It’s certain that the US government also ran these simple calculations before finalizing its decision. As such, we need to consider non-numerical motivations for the withdrawal of funding. Perhaps, as Mr. Trump prepares to face off against Mr. Joe Biden in the 2020 general election, he was motivated by political concerns here to energize his base, and it is with this possibility that we end this article. In other words, the withdrawal of \$400M from the WHO does not really constitute a cohesive effort to protest China's influence in the organization, but rather a psycological move to appeal to Mr. Trump's supporters.

Let’s zoom out and consider this action for what it is - a withdrawal of the US from a global institution accused of being “unfair.” Already in this Trump presidency, there have been a few major examples of this pattern - the withdrawals from the Trans-Pacific Partnership (2017), Paris Climate Agreement (2017), JCPOA (Iran Deal) (2018), and UNESCO (2018). All of examples have been motivated by President Trump’s America First doctrine - in the first two cases, the president felt as if the US received a “bad deal” economically, in the third, a “bad deal” with regards to security vis-a-vis Iran, and, in the fourth, an unfair treatment of Israel, its close ally. Furthermore, in all of these examples, President Trump has publicly expressed interest to revisit each agreement and make a “better deal.” In short, the current administration has often shown willingness to withdraw a crucial American presence in global organizations as leverage to advance what it views as national aims, in true America First style.

Who exactly supports these decisions? In most cases, those who support these actions of withdrawal from international institutions tend to be exactly Mr. Trump’s base - conservative Americans who are wary of globalization after experiencing its effects on the job market in rural America. For example, [in a 2016 poll](https://climatecommunication.yale.edu/visualizations-data/registered-voters-say-us-participate-paris-agreement/), 34% of conservative Republicans sampled stated that the United States should withdraw from the Paris Climate Agreement, with only 3% of sampled Democrats agreeing with that view. This poll and more similar statistics demonstrate that, unlike many past presidents, Mr. Trump seeks not to pursue policies with broad bipartisan support, but rather ones which will energize his own base. With the presidential elections looming only a few months away, Mr. Trump likely recognized a pattern of his supporters unfavorably viewing American support of “unfair” global institutions, and sought to energize his base through the recent WHO announcement.

Time will only tell how the American decision to withdraw funding from the WHO will affect the political landscape, both in US-China relations but also in American domestic politics itself. Now more than ever, though, it’s important that the WHO can maintain its crucial role in combating public health emergencies worldwide, including but not limited to the coronavirus. Any contributions to the organization in such a dire time for global health should be welcome and devoid of excess politicization.
