---
layout: post
title: Capitalizing on a Crisis - Strategic Moves in the Wake of the COVID-19 Pandemic
short: covid19capitalizingcrisis
categories: Politics
author: Davis Tyler-Dudley
date-written: April 4th, 2020
---

The COVID-19 pandemic has brought with it a huge number of globe-spanning effects. The immediate human cost grows with each passing day as hospitals in major urban areas are overwhelmed and the death toll climbs steadily upward. Economic damage continues to unfurl as countries experience skyrocketing unemployment rates and small businesses shut their doors due to plummeting consumer demand. Predictions for elections, such as the 2020 US Presidential race, have been thrown into disarray as leaders struggle to respond to the crisis in a way that preserves their political viability.

These events have dominated the headlines of major news outlets and media sources for weeks. But behind the scenes, the pieces on the chessboard of international affairs keep moving . The People’s Republic of China, where the COVID-19 outbreak first originated, received a great deal of the initial media coverage, but that coverage has shifted ever since the explosion of new cases in the United States and Europe. Recent reports have circulated alternately praising China’s aggressive nationwide lockdown measures and condemning their supposed cover-up. But relatively little attention has been placed on China’s external-focused actions during this time period.

A recent report sent to the White House by three U.S. intelligence officials alleged that the People’s Republic had intentionally misled the global community in its reporting while the initial stages of the crisis unfolded within its borders. Many media outlets and experts in various fields have speculated that China substantially is engaging in substantial underreporting of the number of infected individuals as well as the number of people who died from either COVID-19 itself or complications resulting from it. (INSERT GRAPHIC ABOUT CORONAVIRUS STATISTICS). But the sources who contributed to this new report now claim to have evidence that the Chinese government’s underreporting was the direct result of a campaign of wholesale deception orchestrated from the top down. A misinformation campaign of this size and scale would have considerable strategic ramifications that extend far beyond China itself -- instead of aiming this deception just at its own citizens, Beijing almost certainly intends for its false reporting to serve its wider interests on the world stage.

A crisis creates opportunities. As the US and other major global players turn their focus inwards, China’s leadership is seeking to capitalize on what it sees as a chance to increase its power vis-à-vis the United States. Soft power expansion, diplomatic image shaping, and increased control over international institutions seem to be the preferred methods in this most recent thrust. While the U.S. was busy closing its borders to travelers from Europe (without consulting just about anyone else, according to European officials), China was publicizing its rapid deployment of medical teams and resources to Italy, Serbia, and Iran. While the U.S. was wracked with infighting between federal and state responses, China was assuming a position of leadership within the World Health Organization’s coordinated response. A recent United Nations report praised China for both its domestic measures and its demonstration of leadership on the world stage in combating the pandemic.

All of this is not to say that China’s public health and humanitarian efforts are completely driven by conspiratorial planning and underhanded motivations. Beijing wants to protect the health of its citizens just like any government, and its continued cooperation with international actors is vital to ensuring that the crisis can be dealt with as swiftly and effectively as possible. But what matters in the strategic view is not just the actions taken, but the narrative in which they are framed. Increased perception of China’s position of leadership and legitimacy in the eyes of both states and international organizations will provide more credence and justification for its viewpoints, a hugely important factor when it comes to issues such as the status of Taiwan or the treatment of Uyghurs in Xinjiang. As two Obama-era officials put it: “The status of the United States as a global leader over the past seven decades has been built not just on wealth and power but also, and just as important, on the legitimacy that flows from the United States' domestic governance, provision of global public goods, and ability and willingness to muster and coordinate a global response to crises.” (CITATION FOR DIRECT QUOTE AND ACCOMPANYING IMAGE) The message is clear: if the United States fails to act in a crisis, China will.

As in any discussion of China’s major strategic moves, the eventual response of the United States and its network of allies will serve as a key variable in the final equation. For now, President Donald Trump has tried to weaponize the narrative of the coronavirus’ spread for his own ends by referring to it as the “Chinese virus” or other similar monikers. By doing so, he hopes to shape the narrative of the nation being “at war” against an enemy that originates from a foreign land. For recent historical examples of American presidents putting plans like this into action, we can look to the War on Drugs, a campaign that has largely sought to portray the nation’s problems with narcotics and the crime associated with them as resulting from violent, dangerous enemies lurking on both sides of America’s borders. Trump knows the value of the rally-round-the-flag effect. If he can construct a perception of the nation being under attack, his popularity may be able to survive the otherwise lethal damage sure to result from tremendous loss of life and an unprecedented economic downturn.

But the goal of Trump’s plan -- like much of his administration’s strategic outlook -- is shortsighted. It’s intended to bring President Trump success in his reelection campaign come November, preempting the criticisms that Joe Biden (or whoever else happens to assume the mantle of the Democratic challenger) will surely level against the President for his handling of the crisis. Instead, the President and his cabinet members should turn at least some of their attention outward, maintaining a watchful eye on China’s strategic moves and planning how best to serve America’s interests abroad in this time of crisis.

It may seem like everything in the present moment is slowing to a standstill. But geopolitical maneuvering is just as fast, just as protean, and just as vital as ever.
